Blind Guardian

Blind Guardian is a German metal band formed in the mid-1980s in Krefeld, West
Germany.[1] They are often credited as one of the seminal and most influential
bands in the power metal and speed metal subgenres.[2][3] Blind Guardian is a
part of the German heavy metal scene that emerged in the mid-1980s.

The band's lyrics, written by vocalist Hansi Kürsch, are inspired by the
fiction of fantasy authors such as J. R. R. Tolkien, and Michael Moorcock, as
well as traditional legends and epics.[4] Over the years, a running theme has
developed associating the band members with travelling bards.

Biography

Blind Guardian formed in 1984 in Krefeld, Germany, by Hansi Kürsch (vocals,
bass) and Andre Olbrich (guitar) under the name Lucifer's Heritage. The band
first released two demos in 1985 and 1986, despite undergoing chaotic lineup
changes: Markus Dörk (guitar) and Thomen Stauch (drums) were replaced by
Christof Theißen and Hans-Peter Frey, respectively. Finally, in 1987, Marcus
Siepen joined and Thomen came back to form the lineup which would stay
consistent for the next 18 years.

After Lucifer's Heritage signed a contract with No Remorse Records, the band
changed their name to Blind Guardian to avoid any speculations about Satanism
(in a bio it was stated that they also wanted to distance themselves from the
black metal movement, as their demos were placed in with black metal albums at
local record shops). They released their debut album Battalions of Fear in
1988, which was essentially a speed metal album heavily influenced by
Helloween.[5] These two German bands had close ties, and Helloween founder Kai
Hansen made a guest appearance on Blind Guardian's second LP, Follow the Blind
(1989), where the band revealed some thrash metal influence.[6][7] Their third
LP, Tales from the Twilight World (1990), had a much more melodic and "epic"
feeling, with usage of choir and classical music influence.

Blind Guardian signed with Virgin Records in 1991, and released their fourth
studio album Somewhere Far Beyond in 1992 and the live album Tokyo Tales in
1993. Flemming Rasmussen, former Metallica producer, began working with the
      band in 1994, producing their fifth studio album Imaginations from the
      Other Side, released in 1995, and The Forgotten Tales, an album that
      contained half covers and half original work, released in 1996.

In 1998, Blind Guardian released their epic album Nightfall in Middle-Earth.
"Complete with anthemic choruses, spoken word story lines, and plenty of
bombastic power metal punctuating every dramatic turn", says Allmusic's Vincent
Jeffries, "Nightfall in Middle-Earth is perhaps Blind Guardian's most
triumphant".[8] A concept album based on J. R. R. Tolkien's The
Silmarillion,[4] Blind Guardian's music demonstrated some folk rock influence,
but also featured heavy use of Queen-style layered backing vocals. Since
Nightfall, bass guitar has been played by sessional member Oliver Holzwarth,
and Hansi has been able to devote all his attention to singing. Nightfall was
also the last Blind Guardian album produced by Rasmussen.

A Night at the Opera, named after the Queen album, was released four years
later. On this album, the band's sound lacked almost all influence of their
original speed metal. Power and progressive metal abound, with over the top
orchestral backing and a consistent vocal and guitar layering throughout.[9]
Though not a true concept album, many of the lyrics dealt with the common
themes of religion and relations between human and divine powers. It was
followed by a live album in 2003 and a DVD, Imaginations Through the Looking
Glass, in 2004, which was the last recorded Blind Guardian material to feature
Thomen Stauch on drums. He left the band due to musical differences and was
replaced by Frederik Ehmke. The first album with Ehmke was A Twist in the Myth,
which came out in 2006.

Blind Guardian recently participated in the soundtrack for the In the Name of
the King: a Dungeon Siege Tale fantasy movie (Uwe Boll), which came out in
2008.[10] The band also recorded a theme song for Sacred 2 Fallen Angel RPG
     video game, the prequel to Sacred.[11]

A Voice in the Dark was the next single from Blind Guardian that was released
25 June 2010. On July 30, 2010 the album followed, called At the Edge of Time.
The band started "The Sacred Worlds and Songs Divine Tour 2010", the European
dates will have the opening acts Enforcer and Steelwing. The 22 October in
Gothenburg, Sweden only Steelwing was the opening act. The US dates will have
Holy Grail and Seven Kingdoms and later they were announced that they would
play at Wacken Open Air in 2011.  Musical style Blind Guardian with the band's
definitive scenery in background

Blind Guardian's first two albums, Battalions of Fear and Follow the Blind,
were more in the style of speed metal than their following works. Beginning
with their third album Tales from the Twilight World, Blind Guardian gradually
began to write more complicated compositions focusing less on speed. As of
their sixth album, Nightfall in Middle Earth, Hansi stopped playing bass to
focus on singing. At this point the band began to incorporate large amounts of
orchestral arrangements, and utilized the technique of overdubbing, heavily
influenced by the English rock band Queen.[12]

Blind Guardian's music features the staccato guitars and double bass drumming
characteristic of power metal, as well as the use of overdubs and numerous
backing vocals to create a dense sound. This technique, especially notable in
the guitar and vocal tracks, creates the impression of a vast army of musicians
playing in unison and singing in harmony. This proved significant on all albums
after the first two but most particularly on A Night at the Opera.

Another definitive feature of Blind Guardian music is frequent use of folk
tunes and instruments, especially in power ballads such as "Lord of the Rings",
"The Bard's Song", "A Past and Future Secret", "Skalds and Shadows" and "Curse
My Name", among others.
